Add Trino 452 release notes (#22573)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-452.md

# Release 452 (3 Jul 2024)

## General

> * Fix query plans occasionally not rendering the stage details page. ({issue}`22542`)

Reviewer: This should go in the web ui section

> * Fix a performance regression when using the native filesystem for Azure. ({issue}`22561`)

Reviewer: Dont we do that in the connectors normally?

Author: What connectors would this go to? It's just a filesystem, yeah?

Reviewer 2: Lake Connectors.

## ClickHouse connector

> * Add `query` table function for full query pass-through to the connector. ({issue}`16182`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add `query` table function for full query pass-through to ClickHouse. ({issue}`16182`)
```

Also can we link to docs section of that in the connector docs

## Delta Lake connector

* Add support for type coercion when adding new columns. ({issue}`19708`)
* Improve performance of reading from Parquet files with large schemas. ({issue}`22434`)
* Fix incorrect results when reading `INT32` values in Parquet files. ({issue}`21556`)

## Hive connector

> * Add support for coercion of structural data types for non-partitioned ORC

Reviewer: Do we use the term "ORC tables" .. or do we need to expand to "tables using ORC files"

> # Release 452 (3 Jul 2024)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Release 452 (10 Jul 2024)
```

* Fix `sync_partition_metadata` ignoring case-sensitive variations of partition
  names in storage. ({issue}`22484`)

## Hudi connector

* Improve performance of reading from Parquet files with large schemas. ({issue}`22434`)
* Fix incorrect results when reading `INT32` values in Parquet files. ({issue}`21556`)

## Iceberg connector

* Add support for type coercion when adding new columns. ({issue}`19708`)
* Improve performance of reading from Parquet files with large schemas. ({issue}`22434`)
* Fix files being deleted when dropping tables with the Nessie catalog. ({issue}`22392`)
* Fix incorrect results when reading `INT32` values in Parquet files. ({issue}`21556`)
* Fix failure when hidden partition names conflict with other columns. ({issue}`22351`)
* Fix failure when reading tables with `null` on partition columns while the
  `optimize_metadata_queries` session property is enabled. ({issue}`21844`)
* Fix failure when listing views with an unsupported dialect in the REST
  catalog. ({issue}`22598`)

## Kudu connector

* Fix failure when adding new columns with a `decimal` type. ({issue}`22558`)

## Memory connector

* Add support for renaming columns. ({issue}`22607`)

> * Add support for the `NOT NULL` constraint. ({issue}`22601`)

Author: I'm not sure that adds much meaning?

> * Add support for the `NOT NULL` constraint. ({issue}`22601`)

Reviewer: yeah .. I wasnt sure either .. ignore

  property or the `enable_dynamic_row_filtering` session property. ({issue}`22411`)
* Fix a performance regression when using the native filesystem for Azure. ({issue}`22561`)
* Fix sporadic query failure when the `retry_policy` property is set to `TASK`. ({issue}`22617`)

## Web UI

* Fix query plans occasionally not rendering the stage details page. ({issue}`22542`)

## BigQuery connector

* Add support for using the
  [BigQuery Storage Read API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/storage)
  when using the [`query` table function](bigquery-query-function). ({issue}`22432`)

## Black Hole connector

* Add support for adding, dropping and renaming columns. ({issue}`22620`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Add [`query` table function](clickhouse-query-function) for full query
  pass-through to ClickHouse. ({issue}`16182`)

## Delta Lake connector

* Add support for type coercion when adding new columns. ({issue}`19708`)
* Improve performance of reading from Parquet files with large schemas. ({issue}`22434`)
* Fix incorrect results when reading `INT32` values in Parquet files. ({issue}`21556`)

## Hive connector

> * Add support for coercion of structural data types for non-partitioned tables

Reviewer 3: @Praveen2112, is this similar to the item about varbinary vs varchar?

  using ORC files. ({issue}`22326`)
* Add support for type coercion when adding new columns. ({issue}`19708`)
* Add support for `varbinary` to `varchar` type coercion. ({issue}`22322`)
* Improve performance of reading from Parquet files with large schemas. ({issue}`22434`)

> * Fix incorrect results when reading `INT32` values in Parquet files. ({issue}`21556`)

Author: It's to varchar and decimal, I think.

> * Fix incorrect results when reading `INT32` values in Parquet files. ({issue}`21556`)

Reviewer 3: It might be good to call out, as users may not know what type the files contain but they know what types they deal with on the Trino side. That will call their attention in case they are using those types and have seen problems in the past.

* Fix sporadic query failure when the `retry_policy` property is set to `TASK`. ({issue}`22617`)

## Web UI

* Fix query plans occasionally not rendering the stage details page. ({issue}`22542`)

## BigQuery connector

* Add support for using the
  [BigQuery Storage Read API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/storage)
  when using the [`query` table function](bigquery-query-function). ({issue}`22432`)

## Black Hole connector

* Add support for adding, dropping and renaming columns. ({issue}`22620`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Add [`query` table function](clickhouse-query-function) for full query
  pass-through to ClickHouse. ({issue}`16182`)

## Delta Lake connector

* Add support for type coercion when adding new columns. ({issue}`19708`)
* Improve performance of reading from Parquet files with large schemas. ({issue}`22434`)
* Fix incorrect results when reading `INT32` values in Parquet files. ({issue}`21556`)

## Hive connector

* Add support for coercion of structural data types for non-partitioned tables
  using ORC files. ({issue}`22326`)
* Add support for type coercion when adding new columns. ({issue}`19708`)

> * Add support for reading `varbinary` values as `varchar` columns in Trino. ({issue}`22322`)

Reviewer 3: This one doesn't make a lot of sense to me. Whose "varbinary" type? Hive's? Under what circumstances would that happen?

This seems related to previous changes to allow updating the schema of a table without rewriting all past data. If so, it should be rephrased as "allow changing a column type from varbinary to varchar".

cc @Praveen2112
